The intructions below are for defining the Collective Access schema via an XML "config" file. From experience this can be quite laborious and using the Collective Access UI is probably a lot easier for a number of reasons. 

I've left these instructions here because, hey, they took a while to write and still work if the UI option isn't preferred for some reason. They are also informative as they explain how CA works under the hood.

My recommendation is to read this file but follow the UI instructions listed in other instruction files.

# Adjusting profiles

Any changes to the profile xml file used by Collective Access requires a rebuild of the database
tables (meaning all data will be deleted.)

You can also configure tables manually using the Collective Access administrator UI, though
remember to export these changes to the appropriate XML file at some point to ensure the 
profiles can be rebuilt easily in the future.

If you want to experiment with different profiles you may wish to set the `__CA_ALLOW_INSTALLER_TO_OVERWRITE_EXISTING_INSTALLS__` option in setup.php. By default the installer will refuse to install over an existing installation. With `__CA_ALLOW_INSTALLER_TO_OVERWRITE_EXISTING_INSTALLS__` set the installer will include an option to overwrite existing data. In a real system this is extremely dangerous – any one with access to the installer can delete the entire system – but is very handy for testing and evaluation.

In addition the `__CA_ALLOW_DRAG_AND_DROP_PROFILE_UPLOAD_IN_INSTALLER__` option can be defined in
the setup.php file, allowing you to drag and drop an XML file onto the browser in order to upload and
use the file to install the database.


## Profile installation instructions

Navigate to https://ca.uoaarchdb.cloud.edu.au/install/ to (re-)run the installer.

On this page enter an email address (note - I tried to set up the email server but it didn't work... don't expect emails!) and select a profile from the dropdown menu.

You can upload a new profile xml file by dragging and dropping the file into the browser. This should
then create or update the profile and select it in the "Installation Profile" dropdown.

Pre-made XML files are available in the `~/profile` directory of this repository, please use one of the `YYYY_MM_DD_` files to get started.

Profiles are located in the `/var/www/html/ca/install/profile/xml` directory on the server.

Select the "overwrite existing installation?" box and then click "begin installation". This process
will take a few minutes to complete. When completed you will be given the username/password of the
administrator account - note these down for use!


## What the heck is this xml profile?

See https://manual.collectiveaccess.org/providence/user/dataModelling/introductionData.html to delve into the verbose CA documentation on Data structure and XML profiles. Read on for Mike's abridged version of the XML files.

The xml profile is used to "map/translate" your own database structure/schema (i.e. the Archeology DB schema) into a format that CA can understand how to use. This is done by mapping your own DB tables into 1 of the base-CA table types (objects, collections, places, entities, etc). You can specify as many "sub-types" as you desire and control almost every aspect of those sub-types. i.e. under the "object" table type you could create an "artifact" type, "stone" type, "fruit" type and so forth.

The XML profile is broken up into 5 main sections: Locales, Lists, Elementsets, UserInterfaces, and RelationshipTypes.

## Locales

This is the smallest section of the XML profile and is used to specify the languages to be used throughout the Collective Access instance. e.g.

```
<locales>
  <locale lang="en" country="US">English</locale>
  <locale lang="mi" country="NZ">Māori</locale>
</locales>
```

While this is the smallest section of the profile it is responsible for a large portion of the XML file in the form of Label tags associated with almost every user-facing aspect of the XML file. All tables, metadata elements, relationships, and user inferaces require you to specify a label for the item in question, and each label needs to be tied to one of the specified locales. Currently only English is implemented in the `test-profile.xml`.

## Lists

This section is where you define the ArchDB tables that you wish to populate Collective Access with. The ArchDB tables need to be mapped onto the base CA tables so that CA understands what the ArchDB tables are and what to do with them. The mapping is done in this section of the xml. 

The `lists` section is composed of a number of `<list> </list>` entries. These entries take the form of `<list> code="XXX_YYY"</list>` where `XXX` is typically a base CA table such as `object` or `entity`, and where `YYY` is typically a suffix such as `type`, or `sources` and `statuses`. 

Each of these lists also takes `hierarchical`, `system`, and `vocabulary` boolean flags that determine whether the tables are heirarchical in nature, whether they belong to the CA system, and whether they are vocabulary tables. Most likely you won't need these.

**It is unlikely that you will need to add any new top level list entries, and CA will not work properly if some of the entries are omitted.**

Instead you will need to customise the contents of the list entries.

```
<lists>
  <list code="object_sources" hierarchical="1" system="0" vocabulary="0">
    ...
  </list>
  <list code="object_types" hierarchical="1" system="0" vocabulary="0">
    ...
  </list>
  ...
</lists>
```


The `<list> code="XXX_type"</list>` entries can be used to create one or more custom table types of a base CA table. The example below shows how a `Feature` table can be created using the CA `object` base table by adding it as an item entry:

```
<list code="object_types" hierarchical="1" system="0" vocabulary="0">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Object types</name>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <items>
    <item idno="feature" enabled="1" default="1">
      <labels>
        <label locale="en_US" preferred="1">
          <name_singular>Feature</name_singular>
          <name_plural>Features</name_plural>
        </label>
      </labels>
    </item> 
  </items>
</list>
```

Similarly, sub-types of an ArchDB object can be made by nesting an `<items> </items>` field in an existing ArchDB item:

```
<list code="object_types" hierarchical="1" system="0" vocabulary="0">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Object types</name>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <items>
    <item idno="feature" enabled="1" default="1">
      <labels>
        <label locale="en_US" preferred="1">
          <name_singular>Feature</name_singular>
          <name_plural>Features</name_plural>
        </label>
      </labels>
      <items>
        <item idno="feature_subtype" enabled="1" default="1">
          <labels>
            <label locale="en_US" preferred="1">
              <name_singular>Feature subtype</name_singular>
              <name_plural>Feature subtypes</name_plural>
            </label>
          </labels>
        </item>
      </item> 
  </items>
</list
```

The `<list> code="XXX_sources"</list>` and `<list> code="XXX_statuses"</list>` entries are used to specify "types" that correspond to intrinsic CA table metadata entries `source` and `status` that apply to various tables. They are intrinsic to CA so will break CA if omitted, however they may not be useful for the ArchDB. I have left them in for functionality but feel free to edit their entries as appropriate.

I have tried to add all the major ArchDB tables into the `test_profile.xml` under appropriate CA base table types, and so hopefully new ArchDB tables can be added as sub-types of these. If they can't and you are unsure what CA base type would be suitable then let me know and hopefully I can recommend. Mapping the major tables took a bit of experimentation to work out all of the nuiances.

## Element sets

Once you have lists sorted it is time to populate those tables with metadata. In Collective Access you create metadata fields and attach these to the tables created in the list section. This can be done by creating a `<metadataElement> </metadataElement>` entry. Each entry takes two keyword arguments: `code` which is a unique identifier for the metadata field in question; and `datatype` which specifies the type of metadata you wish to create. For a full list of metadata types see https://manual.collectiveaccess.org/dataModelling/metadata.html.

```
<elementSets>
  <metadataElement code="description" datatype="Text">
    ...
  </metadataElement>
  <metadataElement code="accession_date" datatype="DateRange">
    ...
  </metadataElement>
  ...
</elementSets>
```

Each `MetadataElement` has a `<labels>` section for display and descriptive purposes a `<settings>` section, and a `<TypeRestrictions>` section. The `<settings>` section can be used to specify a wide range of type-specific settings ranging from visual properties to value restrictions. See https://manual.collectiveaccess.org/dataModelling/metadata/AttributeTypeSettings.html for more details. The `<TypeRestrictions>` section is used to associate a metadata field with one or more CA base tables. Each association requires a new `<restriction code="XX">` entry under the `<TypeRestrictions>` section, with XX being a unique code within the `<TypeRestrictions>` section.

```
<metadataElement code="description" datatype="Text">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Description</name>
      <description>Narrative description. This is the primary text used to document the item.</description>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <settings>
    <setting name="fieldWidth">90</setting>
    <setting name="fieldHeight">6</setting>
    <setting name="minChars">0</setting>
    <setting name="maxChars">65535</setting>
  </settings>
  <typeRestrictions>
    <restriction code="r1">
      <table>ca_objects</table>
      <settings>
        <setting name="minAttributesPerRow">1</setting>
        <setting name="maxAttributesPerRow">1</setting>
        <setting name="minimumAttributeBundlesToDisplay">1</setting>
      </settings>
    </restriction>
  <typeRestrictions>
</metadataElement>
```

It is possible to constrain a metadata field to a specific ArchDB table by specifying the `<type>` within the `<restriction>` entry. This is shown in the example below, which shows how you can create a feature specific metadata field.

```
<metadataElement code="feature_metadata" datatype="Text">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Feature-specific metadata</name>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <settings>
    <setting name="minChars">1</setting>
  </settings>
  <typeRestrictions>
    <restriction code="r1">
      <table>ca_objects</table>
      <type>feature</type>
      <settings>
        <setting name="minAttributesPerRow">1</setting>
        <setting name="maxAttributesPerRow">1</setting>
        <setting name="minimumAttributeBundlesToDisplay">1</setting>
      </settings>
    </restriction>
  </typeRestrictions>
</metadataElement>
```

Another nifty thing worth mentioning is the `datatype="Container"` option. Instead of creating a single metadata field, a `Container` allows you to create a group of fields under a single entry. This is a handy way to bundle up metadata that is expected to always be together, and an example of this would be an "Address" container containing entries for "Address line 1", "Address line 2", "postcode" and so on.

## Relationship Types

I have placed this section before User Interfaces as conceptually Relationships should be dealt with before you address UIs (which will likely specify some relations.) 

This section is used to broadly specify relations (i.e. Foreignkeys) between CA's base tables, but more specifically used to establish the types that each of these relations can take. For example we can broadly specify a relationship between CA `Objects` and CA `Entities` using the following code:

```
<relationshipTypes>
  <relationshipTable name="ca_objects_x_entities">
    </types>
      <type code="related" default="0">
        <labels>
          <label locale="en_US">
            <typename>is related to</typename>
            <typename_reverse>is related to</typename_reverse>
          </label>
        </labels>
        <subTypeLeft> </subTypeLeft>
        <subTypeRight></subTypeRight>
      </type>
    </types>
  </relationshipTable>
</relationshipTypes>
```

At least one type is required for a RelationshipTable to be established. This will allow a relation between any CA Object, including ArchDB (sub)types based on a CA Object such as `Feature` and `Sub-Feature`, and any CA Entity such as the ArchDB `Personnel`. 

You can specify multiple types of a relationship in order to better describe the relationship. For example, instead of simply saying that a `Feature` instance and `Personnel` instance are "related", you could create a type to specify that a `Personnel` instance was the "discoverer" of a `Feature` instance, or that a `Personnel` instance was the "cataloguer" of a `Feature` instance:

```
<relationshipTypes>
  <relationshipTable name="ca_objects_x_entities">
    </types>
      <type code="related" default="0">
        <labels>
          <label locale="en_US">
            <typename>is related to</typename>
            <typename_reverse>is related to</typename_reverse>
          </label>
        </labels>
        <subTypeLeft> </subTypeLeft>
        <subTypeRight></subTypeRight>
      </type>
      <type code="discoverer" default="0">
        <labels>
          <label locale="en_US">
            <typename>was discovered by</typename>
            <typename_reverse>was discoverer of</typename_reverse>
          </label>
        </labels>
        <subTypeLeft> </subTypeLeft>
        <subTypeRight></subTypeRight>
      </type>
      <type code="cataloguer" default="0">
        <labels>
          <label locale="en_US">
            <typename>was catalogued by</typename>
            <typename_reverse>was cataloguer of</typename_reverse>
          </label>
        </labels>
        <subTypeLeft> </subTypeLeft>
        <subTypeRight></subTypeRight>
      </type>
    </types>
  </relationshipTable>
</relationshipTypes>
```

These types could apply to any `Object<->Entity` relationship unless you choose to restrict relationship-types to specific (sub)types of CA tables using the `<subTypeLeft>` and `<subTypeRight>` fields within a type. This then enforces the RelationshipType restriction at the DB level.

**From my own experience this was quite fiddly/verbose to specify (in tandem with UI filters)** so I would just enforce this at the UI level unless it is really crucial that a "discoverer" cannot accidentally be used to describe the relationship between, say, a Artefact(Object) and a museum(entity in this scenario). The extra effort to enforce this **could** save you some headaches in the future, but it certainly caused me some headaches trying to test it out! 

## User Interfaces

The final section that we'll cover is the `<userInterfaces>` section. This governs how tables and metadata are displayed in the CA UIs both in terms of viewing and editing. The `<userInterfaces>` section contains an entry for each of the base CA tables.

```
<userInterfaces>
  <userInterface code="objects_ui" type="ca_objects">
    ...
  </userInterface>
  <userInterface code="entities_ui" type="ca_entities">
    ...
  </userInterface>
  ...
</userInterfaces>
```

Each of the `<userInterface>` entries has the usual `<labels>` section, and then a `<screens>` section. Each screen represents an individual page to display selected bundles of metadata. By default each table type comes with a `<basic>` screen that is used to contain the intrinsic metadata such as table UIDs, titles, statuses, access, and more.

```
<userInterface code="objects_ui" type="ca_objects">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Standard object editor</name>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <screens>
    <screen idno="basic" default="1">
      <labels>
        <label locale="en_US">
          <name>Basic info</name>
        </label>
      </labels>
      <bundlePlacements>
        <placement code="preferred_labels">
          <bundle>preferred_labels</bundle>
          <settings>
            <setting name="label" locale="en_US">Title</setting>
            <setting name="add_label" locale="en_US">Add title</setting>
          </settings>
        </placement>
        <placement code="access">
          <bundle>access</bundle>
        </placement>
        <placement code="status">
          <bundle>status</bundle>
        </placement>
      </bundlePlacements>
    </screen>
  </screens>
</userInterface>
```

You can add your own metadata elements to a UI by specifying them in a placement `<bundle> </bundle>` with the prefix `ca_attribute_XXX` where `XXX` is the unique code of the metadata field. The following example shows how to add the custom metadata field `unid` as a bundle in a placement on a screen:

```
<placement code="ca_attribute_unid">
  <bundle>ca_attribute_unid</bundle>
</placement>
```

You can also create placements and bundles to display metadata relations to other CA base tables. This can be done by specifying the bundle as a `<bundle>ca_XXXX</bundle>` entry, such as `<bundle>ca_collections</bundle>` to associate the field with the `collections` CA base table. You can restrict this field to specific types of sub tables, such as ArchDB tables, by adding a settings entry to the `<settings>` section of the bundle as follows:

```
<placement code="ca_related_project">
  <bundle>ca_collections</bundle>
  <settings>
    <setting name="restrict_to_types">project</setting>
    <setting name="label" locale="en_US">Belongs to Project</setting>
  </settings>
</placement>
```
where the contents `YYY` of the `<setting name="restrict_to_types"> YYY </setting>` refers to the code of a specific table. FOr the example above this refers to the `Project` table, which is a type of CA base table `Collections`. You can specify this multiple times to allow options from multiple table types.

Finally, you can create and restrict a screen to a specific table by adding a `<typeRestrictions> </typeRestrictions>` entry to the screen itself. This is useful if you wish to show specific metadata for a specific object, such as for the `Feature` example below:

```
<screen idno="feature" default="0">
  <labels>
    <label locale="en_US">
      <name>Feature-specific metadata</name>
    </label>
  </labels>
  <typeRestrictions>
    <restriction code="feature" type="feature"/>
  </typeRestrictions>
  <bundlePlacements>
    <placement code="ca_attribute_feature_metadata">
      <bundle>ca_attribute_feature_metadata</bundle>
    </placement>
  </bundlePlacements>
</screen>
```

## Extras

A useful cookbook/FAQ for installation profiles can be found at https://manual.collectiveaccess.org/providence/user/Cookbook/cookbook_install_profiles.html.
